Changes in approach and reasons for change
------------------------------------------

We had been able to move to more radical approach from refactoring of existing
code, to a fresh rewrite in faster, more scalable Scala language. We had been
able to do that because we found a very capable Scala programmer who
participated in core Scala projects. Also with move to University of Illinois
we had been able to release 6 months of Dmitry's Mozzherin salary towards Scala
development.

Actual or Anticipated problems or delays and actions or plans to resolve them
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The project had been conceived from within Encyclopedia of Life project. When
it was funded EOL team shrank from 8 to 2 people and Dmitry Mozzherin had a
task of moving EOL to Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, which
delayed development of the Global Names project from August 2014 to April 2015.
In November 2015 Dmitry accepted a position at University of Illinois, which
had been very beneficial for Global Names Architecture in general, but created
delays while Dmitry was moving from Marine Biological Laboratory to University
of Illinois, moved and assembled computer infrastructure, reorganized the team.
There was a significant gap during transfer of this grant, which is not
resolved yet (as of end of April 2016).

As a result fund of the first year in reality stretched over 2 years and
created challenges in preserving current very capable team.

Changes that have significant impact on expenditures
----------------------------------------------------

We did move 6 months of Dmitry's salary towards Alexander Mylstev Scala
development efforts. It became possible because of moving project to University
of Illinois.

Significant changes in use or care of human subjects
----------------------------------------------------
N/A

Significant changes in use or care of vertebrate animals
--------------------------------------------------------
N/A

Significant changes in use or care of biohazards
------------------------------------------------
N/A
